By definition of a mobile network, I can be anywhere in the network.
 How can data packets be transmitted to my
terminal, to the cell where I am?
This is the question we are going to answer in this video.
To understand this question, we need to go back to IP networks.
An IP network is firstly an
interconnection of different
sub-networks, represented by different
colours on this slide.
A sub-network is characterized by a prefix.
Each machine is necessarily on a sub-network
and its address is composed of a prefix which is
specific to that sub-network and an interface Identifier or ID.
Each IP packet that is transferred from one machine to another one
has both a source address and a destination address.
Both addresses contain the prefix
and the interface ID.
Inside an interconnection network, for example the
Internet, only the prefix is used for routing.
In our example, prefix 2 is analyzed
to route the packet towards the correct sub-network.
If we consider mobile networks, we have a problem when a
machine is moved, from one sub-network
for instance sub-network 2 to sub-network 1.
The designers of mobile systems when they
standardized 4G networks decided to associate a
prefix to the Packet Gateway.
So, when I consult a server, for
instance I watch an excellent video on 4G networks on my
smart phone, the packets created by the server contain
the destination address of my mobile terminal, that is
the UE IP address, which includes a prefix specific to the Packet Gateway.
This IP packet
is thus simply routed towards the Packet Gateway.
When we want to transmit the packet to the correct terminal,
we will first transmit it to the Serving Gateway, placing it in another IP packet.
This IP packet will have the IP address of
the Serving Gateway as its destination address.
The IP packet is therefore routed
from the P-Gateway to the Serving Gateway.
Putting one IP packet in another IP packet is called “encapsulation.”
The same encapsulation
principle is used between the Serving Gateway and the eNode B.
Here, we will have the IP address of the eNode B as its destination address.
On the radio interface, as we saw in week 3, the
user’s IP packet is put in a transport block.
This transport block is
sent to a specific RNTI, for Radio Network Temporary
Identifier that corresponds to the mobile terminal.
Let’s look again at what happens at the core of a 4G network.
Between the Serving Gateway and the Packet
Gateway, we have an IP network made up of different routers.
Independently of the interconnection
of these routers, placing the IP packet intended
for the terminal in another IP packet that contains the address
 of the Serving Gateway, means that this IP packet is
routed automatically to the Serving Gateway.
So, every packet that leaves the Packet Gateway is sent
towards the Serving Gateway.
In other words, we have a mechanism that acts like a tunnel,
a mandatory passage so to speak, between the Packet
Gateway and the Serving Gateway.
 You won’t be surprised that we call this principle, “tunneling.”
The same principle is used
between the Serving Gateway and the eNode B;
 we have therefore a second tunnel.
 And then, transmission on the radio interface.
In a few words to make it clear, IP packets
that should be transmitted to a mobile terminal are
systematically routed to the P-Gateway.
They are then put in other IP packets within the 4G core network:
this operation is called encapsulation.
These packets are transmitted hop-by-hop
to the terminal as if they were in a “tunnel”
from the P-Gateway to the S-Gateway and from the S-Gateway to
the eNodeB where the mobile is.