Which protocols are used to exchange data packets
between nodes of a 4G network?
We know that IP is used but is it the only protocol?
Just like Robinson Crusoe alone on his island?
 That is the question we are going to answer in this video.
Remember encapsulation :
when a packet that arrives from an  external network, for example, the Internet
it is taken up by the P Gateway, then placed in another IP packet
that is sent to the S Gateway
and once there, the S Gateway takes it inside and places
it in another packet sent to the eNode B.
Between the P Gateway and the S Gateway, we have an IP network.
If we take the entire stack of IP protocols,
we get the idea, over IP, of a transport protocol
between the endpoints.
At this level, the endpoints are
the P Gateway and S Gateway.
There are two well-known transport protocols:
TCP and UDP. TCP is used a lot, but is relatively
complex due to reliability mechanisms such as the
retransmission of lost packets
and also a complex congestion control.
UDP has the advantage of being much simpler.
So, it’s UDP that was chosen  as the transport protocol.
If we need reliability and retransmission mechanisms,
these will be placed over the
user IP protocol, in other words, between the
server and the mobile terminal:
at that point, using UDP is a very good choice.
So, UDP is used between the Serving Gateway and the
Packet Gateway and between the Serving Gateway and the eNode B.
The moment you speak of a protocol, you’re speaking
of headers that correspond to this protocol.
So, IP packets include a
source address (here the address of the P Gateway),
a destination address (here the  address of the Serving Gateway)
and finally the UDP header with the port numbers.
We could easily say, “Let’s put our user IP
packet directly inside the IP datagram.”
But we know that there are several variations of the
IP protocol: IPv 4, IPv 6, and so on;
we want to keep the possibility of evolution and permit
the transport of other protocols.
To do this, we will develop an
additional protocol that’s called GTP: GPRS Tunneling Protocol.
The idea is to add a format that
allows consistent processing for all
user protocols, whether they be IPv4 IPv6 or any other.
 Therefore, we have different levels of headers, and on this diagram
we see the level of the additional header at the GTP layer.
We’ll explain in the next video what is
in this GTP header.
Now, if we look at the
whole protocol stack, we have, between the Serving
Gateway and the P Gateway, an IP network.
In accordance with the principles
of IP, the physical layer (1) and the data link layer (2)
can be anything.
The only thing that counts is having IP on the Serving Gateway
and the Packet Gateway.
Above the IP layer we have UDP, above UDP, GTP.
To make it clear that we consider user
packets, for example the packets that contain the video
stream if I’m watching a video  on my smart phone,
we talk of GTP-U, U stands for “user plane”.
Above GTP-U we find the user IP.
If we consider everything, we have the protocol stack
that we saw earlier between the Serving Gateway and the
Packet Gateway, and we have the same protocol
stack between the eNode B
and the Serving Gateway.
GTP-U above UDP, above IP
and above the physical and data link layers.
We thus find GTP-U on the S1-U
interface as well as on the S5/S8 interface.
To summarize, user IP packets are put in GTP-U packets, which
are themselves put in UDP packets
transported in IP packets!
The protocol stack between the S-Gateway and the
P-Gateway and between the S- Gateway and the eNodeB
includes IP/UDP/GTP-U/IP.
In the end, IP is not at all alone – unlike Robinson Crusoe.